# Exploring Time Complexity through Algorithm Analysis

[University of Southern Maine Department of Computer Science](https://cs.usm.maine.edu)<br>
[COS 280 Discrete Mathematics II](https://cs.usm.maine.edu/~james.quinlan/cos280/)<br>
Instructor: [James Quinlan](https://cs.usm.maine.edu/~james.quinlan) <br>

**Lab Date**: November 29, 2023<br>


## Overview

This lab is designed to deepen your understanding of time complexity by exploring the performance of different algorithms on various input scenarios. We will focus on sorting algorithms and other basic algorithms, analyzing their behavior on nearly sorted and reverse-sorted lists. The lab also uses Python's `timeit` module to measure the execution time of algorithms.  For example, the following code times the summation of a list of the first 1000 positive integers with 100 trials.  

```
import timeit

def f(x):
  s = 0
  for i in x:
    s += i
  return s

# Timeit
x = range(1,1001)
tictoc = timeit.timeit(lambda:f(x), number = 100)
print(f'Function took an average of {tictoc} seconds')
```

The `timeit` module measures each algorithm's time processing input. The number parameter in `timeit.timeit` specifies the number of executions, and the lambda function contains the algorithm to be tested. Experiment with different input sizes and analyze how the time complexity behaves.


## Learning Objectives

* Gain a clear understanding of time complexity and how it relates to the efficiency of algorithms.
  
* (Implement) and analyze classic sorting algorithms (Bubble Sort, Quick Sort, Insertion Sort, Merge Sort, Selection Sort) regarding their time complexity.

* Explore how the performance of algorithms is affected by different input scenarios, such as nearly sorted and reverse sorted lists.

* Learn how to use Python's `timeit` module for benchmarking algorithms and measuring their execution time.

* Develop critical thinking skills by interpreting and comparing time complexity results, considering factors influencing algorithm performance.

* Understand how algorithm design choices impact time complexity and choose appropriate algorithms based on specific scenarios.


## Problems

An implementation of sorting algorithms (bubble sort, insertion sort, selection sort, merge sort, and quick sort) is given in the file `sorts.py`.  Upload and `import sorts`, or copy and paste these algorithms into a single Colab cell; similarly for `searches.py`.    


1.  A table comparing sorting algorithms' time (and space) complexity can be found on [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sorting_algorithm) that includes best, average, and worst cases.
Set up an experiment to compare the sorting algorithms for each case (best, average, worst). Use `timeit` to benchmark.  Then use `matplotlib` library to plot the results for various sized lists.  An example of using it to plot $(x,y)$ pairs is given below.

	```
	import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
	x = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
	y = [2, 4, 1, 7, 3]

	plt.plot(x, y, marker='o', linestyle='-')
	```

2. Copy the Bubble Sort algorithm to a cell in Colab.  Modify the function to include a count of the number of comparisons.  Set up an experiment with increasing sizes $n$.  Store the count in a list, $C$, then plot $C$ vs. $n$.   

3. Set up an experiment to compare the linear search algorithm with the binary search algorithm using  (best, average, and worst) cases. Use `timeit` to benchmark and graph the results for various-sized lists.

4. Implement a matrix multiplication algorithm and analyze its time complexity for various-sized matrices.   Find its averaging running time and record the operation count. What operations will be counted? 


5. Implement a recursive algorithm to calculate the nth Fibonacci number and analyze its time complexity.  Use a reverse-sorted list of Fibonacci indices (e.g., 10, 9, 8, etc.) and time it on each value. Discuss any optimizations that can be made.








<!-- 
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
 FOOTER 
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
-->
<div style="border-top: 1px solid #ccc;padding:0px 0px 20px 0px;"></div>
<i style="padding-left:0px;">
Last modified  Sun Aug 27 2023 01:20:32 PM EST
<a href="https://cs.usm.maine.edu/~james.quinlan/">Quinlan</a>
</i>  
