# Discrete Mathematics Lab

[University of Southern Maine Department of Computer science](https://cs.usm.maine.edu)<br>
[COS 280 Discrete Mathematics II](https://cs.usm.maine.edu/~james.quinlan/cos280/)<br>
Instructor: [James Quinlan](https://cs.usm.maine.edu/~james.quinlan) <br>

**Lab Date**: September 13, 2023<br>


## Overview

In this lab you will explore conjectures and code (in any language) to solve mathematical problems such as finding a smallest prime factor of a given number or determine the digital sum of a positive integer.  


## Learning Objectives
* Work with prime and composite numbers
* Become exposed to mathematical conjectures
* Code to problem solve
* Use software libraries to extend capabilities


## Problems

1. Count and track the odd prime numbers that are 1 more and 3 more than a multiple of 4.  For example, the primes 3, 7, 11, 19 are all three more than a multiple of 4. The primes 5,13, and 17 are just 1 more than a multiple of 4.
<!-- 
	```
	# code here 
	```
-->
<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
2. Find all numbers $1 \le x \le 32$ with $(x^{32}\,\text{mod}\, 33) \equiv 1$. Note: $32 \equiv -1 \,\text{mod}\, 33$.
<!-- 
	```
	# code here 
	```
-->
<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
3. Write a function that finds the "next prime" given any integer.  Write another function that finds the previous prime number.  For example, `nextprime(17)` returns 19 and `prevprime(17)` returns 13.  Use your `isprime` function from previous lab.
<!-- 
	```
	# code here 
	```
-->
<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
4. Goldbach's Conjecture states that every even natural number greater than $2$ is the sum of two primes.  Verify this for $n \le 10000$.  *Hint*: use the prime functions from previous lab(s). 
<!-- 
	```
	# code here 
	```
-->
<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
5. Find the smallest prime factor of $n! + 1$ for all postive integers $n \le 20$.
<!-- 
	```
	# code here 
	```
-->
<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
6. The Twin Prime Conjecture states there are an infinite number of twin primes (primes that differ by two, e.g., $(11,13), (17,19), (29,31), \dots$ .  How many twin primes can you find?
<!-- 
	```
	# code here 
	```
-->
<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
7. (Sum Square Difference).  Find the difference between the sum of the squares of the first one hundred natural numbers and the square of the sum. For example, the difference between the sum of the squares of the first five natural numbers and the square of their sum is:
$$
(1+2+3+4+5)^2  -  (1^2 + 2^2 + 3^2 + 4^2 + 5^2) = 170.
$$
<!-- 
	```
	# code here 
	```
-->
<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
8. Collatz Conjecture states that for any positive integer $n$, the sequence 
$$
C_n=\left\{
\begin{array}{ll}
3n + 1 &\text{}n \text{ is odd} \\ 
 \frac{n}{2} &\text{} n \text{ is even}.
\end{array} 
\right.
$$
always terminates at $1$.  Write a function that returns the sequence for a given integer $n$.
<!-- 
	```
	# code here 
	```
-->
<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
9. Starting at the origin, $(0,0)$, of a $10 \times 10$ two dimensional grid, simulate a random walk in which the chance of moving in any direction north, south, east, and west are equally probable.  Keep track of how many moves.  Stop moving when a boundary (e.g., $(3,10)$) is reached.  Run this simulation several times and find the average walk length.  How does it behave on a $20 \times 20$ grid?  *Hint*: Import a pseudorandom number generator library.
<!-- 
	```
	# code here 
	```
-->	
<!-- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -->
10. The digital sum is a number between $0$ and $9$ obtained by repeatedly summing the digits of a number.  For example, the digital sum of $591 \rightarrow  5 + 9 + 1 = 15 \rightarrow 1 + 5 = 6$.  That is, the digital sum of $591$ is $6$.  Write a digital sum function, $d(n)$, that takes a positive integer and returns the digital sum.  Then, find the digital sum of $519,\; 18974$, and  $100!$.  *Hint*: If using Python, use the log function from the math library, i.e., `import math`, to get digits.
<!-- 
	```
	# code here 
	```
-->

 

<!-- 
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
 FOOTER 
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
-->
<div style="border-top: 1px solid #ccc;padding:0px 0px 20px 0px;"></div>
<i style="padding-left:0px;">
Last modified  Mon Sep 11 2023 06:35:46 PM EST
<a href="https://cs.usm.maine.edu/~james.quinlan/">Quinlan</a>
</i>  
d