# Discrete Mathematics Lab

[University of Southern Maine Department of Computer science](https://cs.usm.maine.edu)<br>
[COS 280 Discrete Mathematics II](https://cs.usm.maine.edu/~james.quinlan/cos280/)<br>
Instructor: [James Quinlan](https://cs.usm.maine.edu/~james.quinlan) <br>

**Lab Date**: September 27 2023<br>


## Overview

The Principle of Mathematical Induction (or the equivalent **well-ordering principle**--every nonempty set of nonnegative integers has a least element) is a technique to prove universal statements.  

## Learning Objectives
* Generate terms of a sequence
* Verify summation formulas
* Produce evidence as to the truth of a statement
* Conjecture 

## Problems

1. Write a (lambda) function that represents a sequence $f_k = \frac{1}{k(k+1)}$ for $k = 1, 2, \dots$ .  Use this function to find the first ten terms of the sequence.  Note: the syntax for a lambda function is: `name_of_function = lambda variable_name: <expression>`, for example, the mathematical function, $f(x) = 2x+3$ would be `f = lambda x: 2*x + 3`. 
	
2. Write a function that returns the sum of a sequence.  This function should take any `lambda` function, the starting index $m$, and the number of terms $n$, as input. Test on sequence in Problem 1. 

3. Write a function that returns the product of a sequence.  This function should take any `lambda` function, the starting index $k$, and the number of terms $n$, as input.  Test on sequence in Problem 1. 


4. Write a lambda function for $f_k = 1 + \left(\frac{1}{2}\right)^k$ for $k \ge 0$.  List the first five terms of the sequence.  

5. Write a function that uses repeated division by 2 to write an integer in binary notation.  


6. Gather evidence as to the truth of the following formula by testing for several $n$ of increasing size.  We will prove this formula by mathematical induction.   
$$
1 + 2 + 3 + \cdots + n = \frac{n(n+1)}{2}. 
$$

	
7. "*Prove*" $1 + 3 + \cdots (2n - 1) = n^2$.  (See previous lab).  You are asked to actually prove this by mathematical induction as a homework exercise.



8. A **convolution** of two equal sized lists, $[a_1, a_2, \dots, a_n]$ and $[b_1, b_2, \dots, b_n]$ is given by: $a_1 b_1 + a_2 b_2 + \cdots + a_n b_n$, that is the sum of element-wise products.  Write a function that returns the convolution of two equally sized lists (or finite sequences).  Test with `[1,2,3,4,5]` and `[2,3,4,5,6]`.  Can you conjection what the convolution of $[1,2,\dots,n]$ and $[2,3,\dots,(n+1)]$ is equal?  Run for several values of $n$ and record the returned value.  
	
9. The finite **geometric** series formula with $r \ne 1$ is
$$
\sum_{i=0}^{n-1} r^i = \frac{1-r^n}{1 - r} .
$$
Write a function to calculate this series for any $r \ne 1$ and for any $n \ge 1$.  



10. Recursion is a standard method for solving a problem by solving a reduced problem.  The classic example is the Fibonacci sequence defined recursively by: $f_0 = 0$, $f_1 = 1$, and for $n > 1$ 
$$
f_n = f_{n-1} + f_{n-2} .
$$
Write a recursive function to find the $n$-th term of the Fibonacci sequence.  What is $f(5), f(10), f(20), f(40), f(50)$?  What about $f(100)$?




<!-- 
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
 FOOTER 
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
-->
<div style="border-top: 1px solid #ccc;padding:0px 0px 20px 0px;"></div>
<i style="padding-left:0px;">
Last modified  Tue Sep 26 2023 11:49:46 AM EST
<a href="https://cs.usm.maine.edu/~james.quinlan/">Quinlan</a>
</i>  
