# Discrete Mathematics Lab

[University of Southern Maine Department of Computer science](https://cs.usm.maine.edu)<br>
[COS 280 Discrete Mathematics II](https://cs.usm.maine.edu/~james.quinlan/cos280/)<br>
Instructor: [James Quinlan](https://cs.usm.maine.edu/~james.quinlan) <br>

**Lab Date**: October 11, 2023<br>


## Overview

Lab 7 will address sets (in Python).  

## Learning Objectives
* Work with sets in Python.
* Perform operations on sets (in Python)
* Test for membership
* Test whether a set is a subset of another
* Introduce dictionaries


## Problems

1. A **set** is an unordered collection of unique values. Sets are enclosed by curly brackets, {}.
 	For example, $\{1, 2, 3\}$ is a set.  This set is the same as the sets: $\{2, 3, 1\}$ and $\{2,2,2,1,3,3,1\}$.  For the last one to be different, we would need to consider it as a **multi-set** (which we do not).  Sets do not need to be numeric.  Enter the following sets into Python.  Assign each to a variable (or label), e.g., `x = {1,2,3}`. 
 		
 	a. {'Red', 'Green', 'Blue'}
 	
 	b. {2, 3, 4, 6, 5, 1}
 	
 	c. {2, 3, 3, 4, 5, 6, 1}
 
 	d. {1, 'fish', 2, 'fish', 'green fish', 'blue fish'}
 	
2. Loop over the elements of a set of colors above by accessing values directly (not using the `range()` function) to print the colors. *Hint*: `for x in A:`. 

3. Create an empty set, a set with no elements, denoted mathematical as $\emptyset$ by typing `set()`.  One may try to create using just {}.  What happens?  Use `type()` to determine.

4. Create the following sets, $A = \{1, 2, 3\}$, $B = \{3, 1, 2\}$, $C = \{3, 1, 2, 4, 6, 5\}$, and $D = \{2, 5\}$.  Determine the truth of $A = B$ and $A = C$.  How would you guess to determine the equality of two sets?

5. Using the same sets from #4, determine the truth of the following: $2 \in A$, $5 \in C$, and $7 \in C$.  *Hint*: In LaTeX we'd write `2 \in A`. 

6. $A$ is a **subset** of the set $B$ if every element of $A$ is an element of $B$.  We write, $A \subseteq B$.  We can see for example that $D \subseteq C$ since both elements $2$ and $5$ of $D$ are elements of $C$.  Determine whether $A \subseteq B$, $A \subseteq C$, and $C \subseteq D$. In LaTeX, `\subseteq`.  *Hint*: What keyboard character(s) does the subset symbol look like?     

7. A **proper subset** is a subset in which there are elements of one set that are not in the other. We write, $A \subset B$ or $A \subsetneq B$.  In  Note, from #6 we see that $A \subseteq B$.  It is also true that $B \subseteq A$, check.  However, there are elements of $C$ that are *not* in $D$.  In LaTeX, `\subset` or `\subsetneq`.  What keyboard character does this look most like?  Repeat #6 testing for proper subsets.

8. There are three binary operations on sets: union, intersection, and set difference.  Symbolically, $\cup$, $\cap$, $\setminus$.  Find the union, intersection, and difference of: $A \cup C$, $A \cap C$, and $C \setminus D$, where $A, B, C$, and $D$ are defined above in question #4. 

9.  A **dictionary** is an unordered collection (set) of _key-value_ pairs that map immutable keys to values. _Keys_ must be unique (and immutable).  For example, `areacodes = {'207':'Maine','213':'LA','304':'West Virginia','302':'LA','312':'LA'}` is a dictionary containing area codes for several locations in the United States.  Create a dictionary of "grades" that associate an 'A' with the value 90, 'B' with 80, 'C' with 70, etc.  How do you create an empty dictionary (see #3).  

10.  Enter (copy and paste) the area code dictionary above.  Loop over the items and print the dictionary (key - value pairs).  *Hint*: You can use TWO loop items after `for` and the `.items()` function.   
  
<!-- 
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
 FOOTER 
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
-->
<div style="border-top: 1px solid #ccc;padding:0px 0px 20px 0px;"></div>
<i style="padding-left:0px;">
Last modified  Fri Oct 06 2023 02:29:05 PM EST
<a href="https://cs.usm.maine.edu/~james.quinlan/">Quinlan</a>
</i>  
