# Discrete Mathematics Lab

[University of Southern Maine Department of Computer science](https://cs.usm.maine.edu)<br>
[COS 280 Discrete Mathematics II](https://cs.usm.maine.edu/~james.quinlan/cos280/)<br>
Instructor: [James Quinlan](https://cs.usm.maine.edu/~james.quinlan) <br>

**Lab Date**: October 18, 2023<br>


## Overview

This lab focuses on sets, set operations, and set functions.  

## Learning Objectives
* Build sets
* Determine if a set is a subset of another
* Create *a* partition of a set.
* Work with subsets

## Exercises

1. Given any two sets, $A$ and $B$, write a function `issubset` that determines whether $A \subseteq B$.  Function should return `True` if all the elements of $A$ are also elements of $B$.  As soon as one element of $A$ is found not to be in $B$, `return False`.

2. Use `issubset` to determine whether two sets are equal.  Test using various sets $A$ and $B$.  

3. Write a function `uni` that builds a universal set of integers from $1$ to $N$ for some $N \in \mathbb{Z}$.  Hint: start with the empty set, `U = set()`, and "add" to this set.  Note, `U = set(range(1,N))`, however attempt to "build" this set one element at a time as suggested by the hint.  

4. Write a function that returns $A^c$ given that $A$ is a subset of the universal set $U$.

5. Given $U = \{1,2,\dots,10\}$, $A = \{1, 2, 3,7\}$, and $B = \{2, 3, 5, 7, 9\}$.  Find $A \cup B$, $A \cap B$, $A - B$, and $A \cap B^c$.

6. Write a function that receives a set $A$ and an integer $n$ less than or equal to the cardinality of $A$ (i.e., the number of elements of $A$), and returns *a* partition of $A$ into $n$ disjoint subsets.  Use `len()` to find the cardinality.  The partition should be a set of disjoint sets.  Are there other partitions?  How many?

7. Given a set $S$, find $S \times S$, the Cartesian product of $S$ with itself.  For example, if $S = \{1,2\}$, then $S \times S = \{(1,1),(1,2),(2,1),(2,2)\}$.  Write a function that will take any set $S$ and return the set $S \times S$. 

8. Verify the distribute law for sets by writing a function that accepts three sets $A,B$, and $C$ and returns `True` or `False`.  Try with multiple sets.  For reference, the Distributive Law states, for all sets $A,B$, and $C$, 
$$
A \cup (B \cap C) = (A \cup B) \cap (A \cup C) .
$$

9. Write a function `genset(n,m)` that accepts positive integers $n$ and $m$, and returns a random set containing $n$ elements from $1,2.\dots,m$.  For example, `genset(5,10)` may return $\{2,5,6,9,10\}$.  Make sure $m > n$.  

10. Given a nonnegative integer $n$, list all the nonempty subsets of $\{1,2,\dots,n\}$.

 





<!-- 
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
 FOOTER 
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
-->
<div style="border-top: 1px solid #ccc;padding:0px 0px 20px 0px;"></div>
<i style="padding-left:0px;">
Last modified  Mon Oct 16 2023 06:39:12 AM EST
<a href="https://cs.usm.maine.edu/~james.quinlan/">Quinlan</a>
</i>  
